OBL4-OS
August 12, 2020
This is a mandatory assignment. Use resources from the course to answer the following questions. Take
care to follow the numbering structure of the assignment in your submission. Some questions
may require a little bit of web searching. Some questions require you to have access to a Linux machine,
for example running natively or virtually on your own PC, or by connecting to gremlin.stud.iie.ntnu.no
over SSH (Secure Shell). Working in groups is permitted, but submissions must be individual.

1

File systems
1. Name two factors that are important in the design of a file system.
2. Name some examples of file metadata.

2

Files and directories
1. Consider a Fast File System (FFS) like Linux’s ext4.
(a) Explain the difference between a hard link and a soft link in this file system. What is the length
of the content of a soft link file?
(b) What is the minimum number of references (hard links) for any given folder?
(c) Consider a folder /tmp/myfolder containing 5 subfolders. How many references (hard links) does
it have? Try it yourself on a Linux system and include the output. Use ls -ld /tmp/myfolder
to view the reference count (hint, it’s the second column in the output).
(d) Explain how spatial locality is acheived in a FFS.
2. NTFS - Flexible tree with extents
(a) Explain the differences and use of resident versus non-resident attributes in NTFS.
(b) Discuss the benefits of NTFS-style extents in relation to blocks used by FAT or FFS.
3. Explain how copy-on-write (COW) helps guard against data corruption.

3

Security
1. Authentication
(a) Why is it important to hash passwords with a unique salt, even if the salt can be publicly known?
(b) Explain how a user can use a program to update the password database, while at the same time
does not have read or write permissions to the password database file itself. What are the caveats
of this?
2. Software vulnerabilities
1

(a) Describe the problem with the well-known gets() library call. Name another library call that is
safe to use that accomplishes the same thing.
(b) Explain why a microkernel is statistically more secure than a monolithic kernel.

Page 2

